Table of Contents
Previous Chapter
<!-- This file was created with the fm2html filter.
The filter is copyright Norwegian Telecom Research and
was programmed by Jon Stephenson von Tetzchner. -->


 Chapter 7:  Compound statements
Compound statements contain (groups of) other statements; they affect or control the execution of those other statements in some way. In general, compound statements span multiple lines, although in simple incarnations a whole compound statement may be contained in one line. 
The if, while and for statements implement traditional control flow constructs. try specifies exception handlers and/or cleanup code for a group of statements. Function and class definitions are also syntactically compound statements. 
Compound statements consist of one or more `clauses'. A clause consists of a header and a `suite'. The clause headers of a particular compound statement are all at the same indentation level. Each clause header begins with a uniquely identifying keyword and ends with a colon. A suite is a group of statements controlled by a clause. A suite can be one or more semicolon-separated simple statements on the same line as the header, following the header's colon, or it can be one or more indented statements on subsequent lines. Only the latter form of suite can contain nested compound statements; the following is illegal, mostly because it wouldn't be clear to which if clause a following else clause would belong:

if test1: if test2: print x 

Also note that the semicolon binds tighter than the colon in this context, so that in the following example, either all or none of the print statements are executed:

if x < y < z: print x; print y; print z 

Summarizing:

compound_stmt:  if_stmt | while_stmt | for_stmt 
              | try_stmt | funcdef | classdef 
suite:          stmt_list NEWLINE | NEWLINE INDENT statement+ DEDENT 
statement:      stmt_list NEWLINE | compound_stmt 
stmt_list:      simple_stmt (";" simple_stmt)* [";"] 

Note that statements always end in a NEWLINE possibly followed by a DEDENT. Also note that optional continuation clauses always begin with a keyword that cannot start a statement, thus there are no ambiguities (the `dangling else' problem is solved in Python by requiring nested if statements to be indented). 
The formatting of the grammar rules in the following sections places each clause on a separate line for clarity.
 7.1  The if statement
The if statement is used for conditional execution:

if_stmt:        "if" expression ":" suite 
               ("elif" expression ":" suite)* 
               ["else" ":" suite] 

It selects exactly one of the suites by evaluating the expressions one by one until one is found to be true (see section "Boolean operations" on page35 for the definition of true and false); then that suite is executed (and no other part of the if statement is executed or evaluated). If all expressions are false, the suite of the else clause, if present, is executed.

 7.2  The while statement
The while statement is used for repeated execution as long as an expression is true:

while_stmt:     "while" expression ":" suite 
               ["else" ":" suite] 

This repeatedly tests the expression and, if it is true, executes the first suite; if the expression is false (which may be the first time it is tested) the suite of the else clause, if present, is executed and the loop terminates.
A break statement executed in the first suite terminates the loop without executing the else clause's suite. A continue statement executed in the first suite skips the rest of the suite and goes back to testing the expression.
 7.3  The for statement
The for statement is used to iterate over the elements of a sequence (string, tuple or list):

for_stmt:       "for" target_list "in" expression_list ":" suite 
               ["else" ":" suite] 

The expression list is evaluated once; it should yield a sequence. The suite is then executed once for each item in the sequence, in the order of ascending indices. Each item in turn is assigned to the target list using the standard rules for assignments, and then the suite is executed. When the items are exhausted (which is immediately when the sequence is empty), the suite in the else clause, if present, is executed, and the loop terminates.
A break statement executed in the first suite terminates the loop without executing the else clause's suite. A continue statement executed in the first suite skips the rest of the suite and continues with the next item, or with the else clause if there was no next item.
The suite may assign to the variable(s) in the target list; this does not affect the next item assigned to it. 
The target list is not deleted when the loop is finished, but if the sequence is empty, it will not have been assigned to at all by the loop. Hint: the built-in function range() returns a sequence of integers suitable to emulate the effect of Pascal's for i := a to b do; e.g. range(3) returns the list [0, 1, 2].
Warning: There is a subtlety when the sequence is being modified by the loop (this can only occur for mutable sequences, i.e. lists). An internal counter is used to keep track of which item is used next, and this is incremented on each iteration. When this counter has reached the length of the sequence the loop terminates. This means that if the suite deletes the current (or a previous) item from the sequence, the next item will be skipped (since it gets the index of the current item which has already been treated). Likewise, if the suite inserts an item in the sequence before the current item, the current item will be treated again the next time through the loop. This can lead to nasty bugs that can be avoided by making a temporary copy using a slice of the whole sequence, e.g. 

for x in a[:]: 
    if x < 0: a.remove(x) 


 7.4  The try statement
The try statement specifies exception handlers and/or cleanup code for a group of statements:

try_stmt:       try_exc_stmt | try_fin_stmt 
try_exc_stmt:   "try" ":" suite 
               ("except" [expression ["," target]] ":" suite)+ 
               ["else" ":" suite] 
try_fin_stmt:   "try" ":" suite 
               "finally" ":" suite 

There are two forms of try statement: try...except and try...finally. These forms cannot be mixed (but they can be nested in each other). 
The try...except form specifies one or more exception handlers (the except clauses). When no exception occurs in the try clause, no exception handler is executed. When an exception occurs in the try suite, a search for an exception handler is started. This inspects the except clauses in turn until one is found that matches the exception. An expression-less except clause, if present, must be last; it matches any exception. For an except clause with an expression, that expression is evaluated, and the clause matches the exception if the resulting object is "compatible" with the exception. An object is compatible with an exception if it is either the object that identifies the exception, or (for exceptions that are classes) it is a base class of the exception, or it is a tuple containing an item that is compatible with the exception. Note that the object identities must match, i.e. it must be the same object, not just an object with the same value.
If no except clause matches the exception, the search for an exception handler continues in the surrounding code and on the invocation stack.
If the evaluation of an expression in the header of an except clause raises an exception, the original search for a handler is cancelled and a search starts for the new exception in the surrounding code and on the call stack (it is treated as if the entire try statement raised the exception). 
When a matching except clause is found, the exception's parameter is assigned to the target specified in that except clause, if present, and the except clause's suite is executed. When the end of this suite is reached, execution continues normally after the entire try statement. (This means that if two nested handlers exist for the same exception, and the exception occurs in the try clause of the inner handler, the outer handler will not handle the exception.) 
Before an except clause's suite is executed, details about the exception are assigned to three variables in the sys module: sys.exc_type receives the object identifying the exception; sys.exc_value receives the exception's parameter; sys.exc_traceback receives a traceback object (see page17) identifying the point in the program where the exception occurred.
The optional else clause is executed when no exception occurs in the try clause. Exceptions in the else clause are not handled by the preceding except clauses.
The try...finally form specifies a `cleanup' handler. The try clause is executed. When no exception occurs, the finally clause is executed. When an exception occurs in the try clause, the exception is temporarily saved, the finally clause is executed, and then the saved exception is re-raised. If the finally clause raises another exception or executes a return, break or continue statement, the saved exception is lost.

When a return or break statement is executed in the try suite of a try...finally statement, the finally clause is also executed `on the way out'. A continue statement is illegal in the try clause. (The reason is a problem with the current implementation  this restriction may be lifted in the future).
 7.5  Function definitions
A function definition defines a user-defined function object (see "The standard type hierarchy" on page12)(1):

funcdef:        "def" funcname "(" [parameter_list] ")" ":" suite 
parameter_list: (defparameter ",")* ("*" identifier [, "**" identifier] 
                                    | "**" identifier 
                                    | defparameter [","]) 
defparameter:   parameter ["=" expression] 
sublist:        parameter ("," parameter)* [","] 
parameter:      identifier | "(" sublist ")" 
funcname:       identifier 

A function definition is an executable statement. Its execution binds the function name in the current local name space to a function object (a wrapper around the executable code for the function). This function object contains a reference to the current global name space as the global name space to be used when the function is called.
The function definition does not execute the function body; this gets executed only when the function is called. 
When one or more top-level parameters have the form parameter = expression, the function is said to have "default parameter values". Default parameter values are evaluated when the function definition is executed. For a parameter with a default value, the correponding argument may be omitted from a call, in which case the parameter's default value is substituted. If a parameter has a default value, all following parameters must also have a default value  this is a syntactic restriction that is not expressed by the grammar.(2)
Function call semantics are described in section "Calls" on page31. When a user-defined function is called, first missing arguments for which a default value exists are supplied; then the arguments (a.k.a. actual parameters) are bound to the (formal) parameters, as follows:


If there are no formal parameters, there must be no arguments.

If the formal parameter list does not end in a star followed by an identifier, there must be exactly as many arguments as there are parameters in the formal parameter list (at the top level); the arguments are assigned to the formal parameters one by one. Note that the presence or absence of a trailing comma at the top level in either the formal or the actual parameter list makes no difference. The assignment to a formal parameter is performed as if the parameter occurs on the left hand side of an assignment statement whose right hand side's value is that of the argument.


If the formal parameter list ends in a star followed by an identifier, preceded by zero or more comma-followed parameters, there must be at least as many arguments as there are parameters preceding the star. Call this number N. The first N arguments are assigned to the corresponding formal parameters in the way descibed above. A tuple containing the remaining arguments, if any, is then assigned to the identifier following the star. This variable will always be a tuple: if there are no extra arguments, its value is (), if there is just one extra argument, it is a singleton tuple.



Note that the `variable length parameter list' feature only works at the top level of the parameter list; individual parameters use a model corresponding more closely to that of ordinary assignment. While the latter model is generally preferable, because of the greater type safety it offers (wrong-sized tuples aren't silently mistreated), variable length parameter lists are a sufficiently accepted practice in most programming languages that a compromise has been worked out. (And anyway, assignment has no equivalent for empty argument lists.) 
It is also possible to create anonymous functions (functions not bound to a name), for immediate use in expressions. This uses lambda forms, described in section "Boolean operations" on page35.
 7.6  Class definitions
A class definition defines a class object (see section "The standard type hierarchy" on page12):

classdef:       "class" classname [inheritance] ":" suite 
inheritance:    "(" [expression_list] ")" 
classname:      identifier 

A class definition is an executable statement. It first evaluates the inheritance list, if present. Each item in the inheritance list should evaluate to a class object. The class's suite is then executed in a new execution frame (see section "Code blocks, execution frames, and name spaces" on page23), using a newly created local name space and the original global name space. (Usually, the suite contains only function definitions.) When the class's suite finishes execution, its execution frame is discarded but its local name space is saved. A class object is then created using the inheritance list for the base classes and the saved local name space for the attribute dictionary. The class name is bound to this class object in the original local name space. 


Footnotes

(1)The new syntax to receive arbitrary keyword arguments is not yet documented in this manual. See chapter 12 of the Tutorial.
(2)Currently this is not checked; instead, def f(a=1,b) is interpreted as def f(a=1,b=None).

Table of Contents
Next Chapter
